1. co_nor, 3rd sing. masc.
co_na_tur       - he tries
co_na_ba_tur    - he was trying
co_na_bitur     - he will be trying
co_na_tus est   - he has tried, he tried
co_na_tus erat  - he had tried
co_na_tus erit  - he will have tried
co_ne_tur        
co_na_re_tur    
co_na_tus sit   
co_na_tus esset 
co_na_re        - try!
co_na_mini_     - try! (pl)

2. fateor, 2nd sing. fem.
fate_ris, fate_re       - you confess
fate_ba_ris, fate_ba_re - you were confessing
fate_beris, fate_bere   - you will confess
fassa es    - you have confessed, you confessed
fassa era_s - you had confessed
fassa eris  - you will have confessed
fatea_ris / fatea_re     
fate_re_ris / fate_re_re
fassa si_s
fassa esse_s
fate_re - confess!
fate_mini_ - confess! (pl)


3. audeo_, 1st plur. fem.

4. sequor, 3rd plur. neut.

5. experior, 2nd plur. masc.

6. morior, 1st sing. fem.

Drill Sentences
A.
1. Although mother's love for you (pl) is huge, that woman loves me too.
2. This Roman empire, brave soldiers, because of your faith, because of your strength is held.
3. Father was carrying this sword early. Let it also be carried by me.
4. Although on that unlucky day my brother had died in the battle line, often after these things I saw his shadow and heard his voice.
5. The brave man out from that battle line is owed to death: A beautiful but bitter death certainly awaits him.
6. You have my books in your hands. Read your own and give, desirous one, mine to me.
7. We will happily go away from that place. We will certainly leave the enemies behind.
8. When that great force of war is stirred up in Italy, even farmers will dare to fight with courage.
9. That unfortunate slave of yours has little trustworthiness and a bad attitude. Leave him behind on this island unless he confesses everything.
10. Caesar ordered part of his troops to be led into the province, part to be left in this place.
11. The way of virtue is difficult, my son. I will nevertheless follow this way. You are also trying to follow. You will even surpass the famous Cicero in (respect to) virtue if you shoud try.
12. Those slaves worked for many years for their master. You could often see them in the country or in the city. Now on because of their flight the master himself is trying to work in his own fields.
13. Many things (I will indeed confess) we in our consulship with your men, senators, for this city and empire, for the life of the citizens, and for the republic have managed.
14. Night has departed, day has returned, the soldiers go back to battle. Even to the conquered men courage has returned into (their) souls.
15. Every man is mindful of his own situation. All men love themselves, live entirely for themsleves. do all things for their own (men?).
16. These words of the ancients cannot be understood with difficulty if you (pl). remember their great love of virtue.
17. If we don't form a plan soon, we will be conquered by an army of slaves. If only the consul himself would come from Rome for a few days with a large troop of brave soldiers.
18. When we went to Rome, you so readily received us as we will always remember. You, if ever you should come to the countryside, would be well recieved by us.
19. "If I should have fame after these good things, I would be lucky." "The senate and Roman people, as to me at least it seems, will remember your accomplishments through all the years."
20. A zeal for money moves many men. You are also moved by a love of gold. May that love of yours not be a source of evil for you!
21. At this very time, great king, our allies are being driven into bitter slavery. Indeed you freed us, the lucky men, from this danger beore. For in fact with your keeness of mind you had seen the force and nature of many situations.
22. If on that very night, senators, I had not conquered this enemy desirous of the revolution, he would have dared to stir up war between the citizens in this republic.
23. I have been reading (and still am) for many days and nights a poem about the nature of things. This at least I have understood: all things live and are moved by (means of) (because of?) nature and their own ability.
24. Between the delays of the senate the citizens were listening to the words of the consul with enthusiasm. To them however he was saying nothing (of) good. For in fact he was pondering a flight away from the city for him and his men.
25. That (contemptible) man (of yours) has sought the consulship for many years. If it should accept him however,  all men in th state will be frightened by (because of, from) this great disturbance.
26. Friendship between gods and men is a beautiful thing. Miserable before (ahead of) all men, in my opinion, is the man without friends.
27. I drove every animal out from the fields althought (it was) a difficult affair. For a troop of fierce enemies will soon return with arms.
28. On that very day the consul came into the senate and said that very thing to the fathers: "Citizens are fighting with citizens. Part of the soldiers have given themselves into flight with Gaius, part remain with Antony. Although there is not even an appearance of courage in these men, they have the faith of the people."
29. In respect to appearance our troops had conquered, however in respect to the situation they had been conquered. So they would have admitted if they had not been moved by fear of punishment. Not even the consul has dared to say true things because of this fear.
30. The consul was ordering the people to remember this unfortunate battle: "I will certainly remember these matters. You too remember!"
31. After these outstanding deeds, friend, you will be received into the temples of the gods themselves. Our poet (along) with the citizens will praise your accomplishments for many years.
32. I do not even desire ( / desire not even) to remember that man. Although I had loved him strongly for ten years, a certain attitude remains to me: with outstanding hatred I hate him.
33. If having followed Caeser into battle I should die, set me aside of the dead in the ground and return to the city. Remember to tell this to my sons: "Death overcame that man between the battle lines. And indeed he had dared many brave things."
34. This I will confess. If I had ever fought bravely with the enemy, I would have certainly died with great glory. I fled however because of fear. If only I had departed from life!
35. "Let him be driven from the city. To say this against you he is no able; he would have been able against Caeser when he was considering the rights of the citizens for litle."
36. At night that brave citizen easily led a band of soldiers out of danger. Fortune, as often, has followed courage.
37. The ancient kings for many years managed many things at home, accomplished many things entirely. The poets often sang of their accomplishments.
38. The unlucky consul was killed by the wicked enemy. On account of the death of the latter man (consul) let the former man (enemy) die and pay the penalty for (the benefit of) the Romans.
39. The brothers were returning home after the bitter war. If only their father had not been miserably killed through an ambush of the enemies.
40. Because we had been frightened by the great motion of the soldiers, for days and nights we remained at home and did not dare to walk through the streets; we feared those fierce battle lines.
41. If the consul were ordering the army out of the city, many citizens would happily be following. For they are strongly desirous of war.
42. At that time fear of the enemies entirely ruled the mind of that consul (of yours): not having even tried a battle he surrendered his arms to the enemy.
43. In those days the Romans dared to rule the republic only through virtue and the liberal arts.
44. I am a lucky man: the gods all certainly love me. For they have removed me from all danger. Although at that time I was being considered strong by my people, in (respect to) the real matter I was always desirous of flight.
45. Our men at that time were making way with difficulty through the battle lines of the enemies and coming to the ciy walls. In the battle fighting was fiercely being done and it was not an easy thing for our men to approach.
46. Why do you, Marc Antony, desire to abandon you own citizens? For you could manage the republic well. The republic will not be able to be without your judgement. I (m) am saying these things having experiencd your wisdom.
47. Father having died at that time left me behind me with my brothers. We, since we were without money and (what's more) all things, were miserably going to Rome and seeking a new place.
48. Titus, a man outstanding in reputation, although not able to conquer the enemy by (through) himself, held many soldiers in the army by means of his appearance of courage. He was saying these words to them: "Let us experience the fortune of war by means of courage." (?)
49. The consul to the senate on that day: "Let not the words of the enemies frighten us, but their brave deeds. If however the army of the Roman people should be sent to the island, the war would be easily completed within a few days. Let the king himself feel and experience our men in arms."
50. After the army made flight among the enemies, the inhabitants unhappy in aspect were miserably wandering through the fields. Indeed at that time many people, although they were pondering a revolution, did nothing. For they were remembering not only the disturbance of Catiline but also the punishments.
51. I have great confidence and (what's more) these things I have seen: after fighting was fiercely done, not even ten of the enemies were able to give themselves into flight. The Roman soldiers killed them all. And indeed many of their arms were left behind in that very place.
52. I will hand down (relate) the accomplishments of that famous Cato without anger and enthusiasm. For I strongly desire to show to you true things and not false things. This thing has come for me into mind: entirely through power of mind (spirit) he made good things out of bad - and easily.
53. If the inhabitants of the land desire a revolution, they will not be easily ruled with words. Nothing however is difficult for their king: he is still able to rule every pursuit of his people by means of advice. On account of this reason his safety is a source of great concern to the senate and people.
54. The fierce king led his army against the enemy. Moreover when his soldiers came to the city walls, e said these things: "You are an army army of good citizens. That battle of yours will soon be completed because you few men have often conquered many men." During these utterances every fear was carried away to the advantage of the soldiers. 